README  -*- text -*-

GNU Emacs REDUCE Integrated Development Environment:
Major modes for editing and running REDUCE source code

Author: Francis J. Wright <https://sourceforge.net/u/fjwright>

Version 1.5 -- $Id: README 4282 2017-11-30 14:55:06Z fjwright $

REDUCE IDE is a package that provides an Integrated Development
Environment for the REDUCE computer algebra system within the GNU
Emacs editor.  Its two major components are Emacs Lisp libraries that
provide major modes for respectively editing REDUCE source code and
running a *command-line version* of REDUCE in an Emacs window.
However, many of the facilities require that Emacs is running under a
GUI such as Microsoft Windows or the X Window System under some
flavour of UNIX or Linux.

REDUCE IDE requires GNU Emacs 23 or later, although I developed the
current version using GNU Emacs 26.  I don't explicitly support
XEmacs.

* Source files

Required:

reduce-mode.el		- REDUCE source editing mode

Optional:

reduce-run.el		- runs REDUCE in an Emacs buffer
reduce-ide.texinfo	- texinfo documentation source

* Installation

Provided you are using GNU Emacs 24 or later, I recommend that you
install the complete package, including documentation in info format,
by following the instructions at
<http://reduce-algebra.sourceforge.net/reduce-ide/>.  Alternatively,
download reduce-mode.el and optionally reduce-run.el from
<https://sourceforge.net/p/reduce-algebra/code/HEAD/tree/trunk/generic/emacs/>
to any convenient directory and run the Emacs command
`package-install-file' on reduce-mode.el and then optionally on
reduce-run.el.  *Note that reduce-mode.el must be installed first.*
For further details, see "Packages" in the Emacs manual.

For brief manual installation instructions see the comments after
"Usage" in the .el files.

* Documentation

The user's guide, generated from reduce-ide.texinfo, is available as a
32-page PDF document or a multi-page HTML document via
<http://reduce-algebra.sourceforge.net/reduce-ide/>.

You can also generate documentation yourself in various formats,
including info, HTML and PDF, from reduce-ide.texinfo, but you need
the GNU Texinfo package; see <http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/>.
The commands I used to generate the formats that I provide are listed
at the end of reduce-ide.texinfo.  For further details, please read
sections 20 to 22 of the Texinfo manual, available online at
http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/. For a quick
summary, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texinfo.
